Attempt to make SPEC 12 complete and unambiguous (#1)
tupui/specs: spec-0012/index.md

date: 2024-06-06
author:
  - "Pamphile Roy <roy.pamphile@gmail.com>"
  - "Matt Haberland <mhaberla@calpoly.edu>"
discussion: https://discuss.scientific-python.org/t/spec-12-formatting-mathematical-expressions
endorsed-by:
---

## Description

PEP8 and other established styling documents do not include guidelines about
styling mathematical expressions. This leads to individual interpretation and
styles which may conflict with those of others. We seek to standardizing the

> way we  represent mathematics for the same reason we standardize other code: 

Author: ```suggestion
way we represent mathematics for the same reason we standardize other code: 
```

it brings consistency to the ecosystem and allows collaborators to focus on
more important aspects of the code.

This SPEC standardize the formatting of mathematical expressions.

## Terminology

An "explicit" expression is a code expression enclosed within parentheses or
otherwise syntactically separated from other expressions (i.e. by code other

> than operators, whitespace, literals, or variables). For example, in the list

Author: I'm not sure if this list is complete.

comprehension:
```python3
for j in range(1, i + 1)
```
The output expression `j` is one explicit expression and the input sequence
`range(1, i + 1)` is another. 

A "subexpression" is subset of an expression that is either explicit or could
be made explicit (i.e. with parentheses) without affecting the order of
operations. In the example above, `j` and `range(1, i + 1)` can also be
referred to as explicit subexpressions of  the whole expression, and `1` and
`i + 1` are explicit subexpressions of the expression `range(1, i + 1)`. `i` and
`1` are "implicit" subexpressions of `i + 1`: they could be written as explicit
subexpressions `(i)` and `(1)` without affecting the order  of operations, but they

> are not explicit as written.

Author: I think this concept might still need refinement to make the rules unambiguous, but let's see if others find ambiguities before adding unnecessarily.

Reviewer: I was not sure about how detailed this should be as I would imagine it could depend on how formatter operate internally.

Author: To some extent, I intended to write this to communicate the rules with the developers of Black and ruff. If it does not need to be as precise for readers, the formal definitions can be moved to the postscript for the interested reader.

As another example, in `x + y*z`, `y*z` is a subexpression because it could be made
explicit as in `x + (y*z)` without changing the order of operations. However, `x + y`
would not be a subexpression because `(x + y)*z` would change the order of operations.
Note that `x + y*z` as a whole may also be referred to as a "subexpression" rather than

> an "expression" even though `(x + y*z)` is not a "proper" subset of the whole.

Author: ```suggestion
an "expression" even though `(x + y*z)` is not a proper subset of the whole.
```

A "simple" expression is an expression involving only one operator priority level
without considering the operators within explicit subexpressions.
A "compound" expression is an expression involving more than one operator
priority level without considering the contents of explicit subexpressions.
For example, 
- `x + y - z` is a simple expression because `+` and `-` have the
same priority level. There are no explicit subexpressions to be ignored.
- `x * (y + z)` is also a simple expression because there is only one operator
between `x` and the explicit subexpression `(y + z)`; we ignore the contents - and
especially the operator - within the explicit subexpression; conceptually, it may
regarded as `(...)`.
- `x * y + z` is a compound expression; there are two operators and no explicit
subexpressions that can be ignored.

> The acronym PEMDAS commonly refers to "parentheses", "exponential", "multiplication",

Author: ```suggestion
The acronym PEMDAS commonly refers to "parentheses", "exponentiation", "multiplication",
```

"division", "addition", and "subtraction". Herein, we will consider these operators
to be "PEMDAS operators", and we will also include the unary `+`, `-`, and `~` in
this category for convenience. The order of operations of PEMDAS operators is typically
taught in primary school and reinforced throughout a programmer's training and
experience, so it is assumed that most programmers are comfortable relying on the
implicit order of operations of expressions involving a few PEMDAS operations. Implicit
order of operations becomes less obvious as the number of distinct operator priority
levels increases and when multiple non-PEMDAS operators are involved. Portions of this
acronym, namely MD and AS, will be used below to refer to the corresponding operators.

## Implementation

> The following rules are not imagined to be all encompassing, and may be

Author: ```suggestion
The following rules are not imagined to be all encompassing, and there may be
```

syntactically valid cases in which the following rules would lead to contradictions.
Nonetheless, we expect them to be useful in most cases, and projects that adopt the

> SPEC endeavor to use them in typical cases. These rules are intended to respect and

Author: ```suggestion
SPEC endeavor to use them where practical. These rules are intended to respect and
```

> complement the PEP8 rules (relevant sections includes [id20](https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0008/#id20) and [id20](https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0008/#id28)).

Author: ```suggestion
complement the PEP8 rules (relevant sections includes [id20](https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0008/#id20) 
and [id28](https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0008/#id28)).
```

0. Unless required by other rules, rely on the implicit order of operations;
   i.e., do not add extraneous parentheses. For example, prefer `u**v + y**z`

>    over `(u**v) + (y**z)`, and prefer `x + y + z` over `(x + y) + z`.

Author: I thought about prefacing this rule like:
> Unless required by other rules or excepted by rule 9

but I'd prefer not to refer to a rule that hasn't come up yet. Users who read `(x + y) + z` and think of cases in which it would be OK may just have to wait until they get to rule 9.

1. Always use the `**` operator and unary `+`, `-`, and `~` operators *without*
   surrounding whitespace. For example, prefer `-x**4` over `- (x ** 4)`. 
2. Always surround non-PEMDAS operators with whitespace, and always make the priority of
   non-PEMDAS operators explicit, even if the parentheses are consistent with the
   implicit order of operations. For example, prefer `(x == y) or (w == t)` over
   `x==y or w==t`.[^1]
3. Always surround AS operators with whitespace.
4. Typically surround MD operators with whitespace, except when there are lower-priority 
   operators (namely AS) within the same compound expression or the division operation
   would be written mathematically as a fraction with a horizontal bar.
   For example, prefer `z = -x * y**t` over `z = -x*y**t`, but
   prefer `z = w + x*y**t` over `z = w + x * y**t` due to the presence of the
   lower-priority addition operator. Also, prefer `z = t/v * x/y` over
   `z = t / v * x / y` if this would  be written mathematically as the product of

>    two fractions.

Author: I think this is the hairiest part of the whole thing - there are a lot of reasons why we might or might not want to include whitespace when it comes to `+-*/`. I expect this will need revision.

5. According to the other rules, only `**`, `*`, `/`, and the unary `+`, `-`, and `~`
   operators can appear in implicit subexpressions without spaces. In such expressions,
   - Include unary operators at the left, and use at most one within an implicit
     subexpression without spaces. 
   - Include `**` operators at the right, and use at most one within an implicit
     subexpression without spaces.
  
   To achieve these goals, simplification or the addition of parentheses may be required.
   For example:
   - The expressions `--x` and `-~x` would be implicit subexpressions without spaces
     containing more than one unary operator. The former can be simplified to `+x` or

>      simply `x`, and the latter requires explicit parentheses, i.e. `-(~x)`.

Author: This brings to mind that I probably want to specify somewhere that adjacent use of binary and unary AS operators should be simplified, too. For instance, `x - -y` should be `x + y`.

   - The expression `x**y**z` would be an implicit subexpression without spaces
     containing more than one `**` operator. This code would be executed as `x**(y**z)`
     following the implicit order, but the explicit parentheses should be included for
     clarity.
   - In the expression `t**v*x**y + z`, no spaces are used around the multiplication
     operator due to the presence of the lower-priority addition operator. However,
     this would lead to `t**v*x**y` being an implicit subexpression without spaces
     containing more than one `**` operator. This code would be executed as 
    `(t**v)*(x**y) + z`, but the explicit parentheses should be included for clarity.  
6. When breaking lines at operators, always include the operator at the beginning
   of the new line rather than at the end of the old line, and use parentheses if
   needed to allow for implicit rather than explicit line breaks. For example, if
   `x + y` must be broken, prefer
   ```python3
   (x
    + y)
   ```
   over
   ```python3
   x + \
   y

>    ```

Author: This is specified by PEP8; we might be able to remove it, or at least we should mention that it is just a reinforcement of PEP8.

7. If required to satisfy other style requirements, include line breaks between
   the outermost explicit subexpression possible. For example, if
   `t + (w + (x + (y + z))))` must be broken, prefer
   ```python3
   (t 
    + (w + (x + (y + z)))))
   ```

>    (if this break satisfies other requirements) over

Author: ```suggestion
   over
```

   ```python3
   (t + (w + (x + (y 
                   + z)))))
   ```
   If there are multiple candidates, include the break at the first opportunity.
8. If line breaks must occur within a compound subexpression, the break should
   be placed at the operator with lowest priority. For example, if
   (x + y*z) must be broken, prefer
   ```
   (x
    + y*z)
   ```
   over
   ```
   (x + y
    * z)
   ```
   If there are multiple candidates, include the break at the first opportunity.
9. All preceeding rules may be broken if there is a clear reason to do so. Examples include:

>    - They conflict with other style rules. For example, there is not supposed to be
>      whitepace surrounding the `**` operator, but one can imagine a chain of `**`
>      operations that exhausts the character limit of a line.
>   - Domain knowledge suggests a reason. For instance, in the expression
>     `t = (x + y) - z`, it may be important to emphasize that the addition should be
>     performed first for numerical reasons or because `(x + y)` is a conceptually
>     important quantity. In such cases, consider adding a comment, e.g.
>     ```python3
>     t = (x + y) - z  # perform `x + y` first for precision
>     ```
>     or breaking the expressions into separate logical lines, e.g.
>     ```
>     w = x + y
>     t = w - z
>     ```

Author: ```suggestion
   - They conflict with other style rules. For example, there is not supposed to be
     whitepace surrounding the `**` operator, but one can imagine a chain of `**`
     operations that exhausts the character limit of a line.
   - Domain knowledge suggests a reason. For instance, in the expression
     `t = (x + y) - z`, it may be important to emphasize that the addition should be
     performed first for numerical reasons or because `(x + y)` is a conceptually
     important quantity. In such cases, consider adding a comment, e.g.
     ```python3
     t = (x + y) - z  # perform `x + y` first for precision
     ```
     or breaking the expressions into separate logical lines, e.g.
     ```python3
     w = x + y
     t = w - z
     ```
```

subexpressions that can be ignored.

The acronym PEMDAS commonly refers to "parentheses", "exponentiation", "multiplication",
"division", "addition", and "subtraction". Herein, we will consider these operators
to be "PEMDAS operators", and we will also include the unary `+`, `-`, and `~` in
this category for convenience. The order of operations of PEMDAS operators is typically
taught in primary school and reinforced throughout a programmer's training and
experience, so it is assumed that most programmers are comfortable relying on the
implicit order of operations of expressions involving a few PEMDAS operations. Implicit
order of operations becomes less obvious as the number of distinct operator priority
levels increases and when multiple non-PEMDAS operators are involved. Portions of this
acronym, namely MD and AS, will be used below to refer to the corresponding operators.

## Implementation

The following rules are not imagined to be all encompassing, and there may be
syntactically valid cases in which the following rules would lead to contradictions.
Nonetheless, we expect them to be useful in most cases, and projects that adopt the

> SPEC endeavor to use them where practical. These rules are intended to respect and

Reviewer: A bit too verbose. These are the rules we are defining, that's it. As with everything, we might have missed something or have bugs, that's a given to me and SPECs are not immutable.

Author: ```suggestion
These rules are intended to respect and
```

complement the PEP8 rules (relevant sections includes [id20](https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0008/#id20) 

> and [id28](https://www.python.org/dev/peps/pep-0008/#id28)).

Reviewer: What is missing from this intro is if the rules are to be applied sequentially or if they are independent.

Author: Neither? All are supposed to be satisfied simultaneously.

0. Unless required by other rules, rely on the implicit order of operations;
   i.e., do not add extraneous parentheses. For example, prefer `u**v + y**z`
   over `(u**v) + (y**z)`, and prefer `x + y + z` over `(x + y) + z`.
1. Always use the `**` operator and unary `+`, `-`, and `~` operators *without*

>    surrounding whitespace. For example, prefer `-x**4` over `- (x ** 4)`. 

Reviewer: `prefer`: I think we should be more direct, these are rules and there should be no ambiguity. And you have rule 10 to break things if needed.

With such document, the norm is to use something like the RFC-2119 https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2119

Here and bellow with things like "should". This makes it too ambiguous to me as well. There should be one and only one was to do things. That's the goal of this doc, that it can be used by any formatter and it would give the same output consistently.

Author: We can change "prefer... over" to "use... instead of"?

I read RFC-2119 to mean that "should" is the prefered use because these *are not* absolute requirements. There are exceptions as defined by rule 10.

Author: @lucascolley what do you think on this point?

date: 2024-06-06
author:
  - "Pamphile Roy <roy.pamphile@gmail.com>"
  - "Matt Haberland <mhaberla@calpoly.edu>"
discussion: https://discuss.scientific-python.org/t/spec-12-formatting-mathematical-expressions
endorsed-by:
---

## Description

> PEP8 and other established styling documents do not include guidelines about

Author: ```suggestion
[PEP 8](https://peps.python.org/pep-0008)
and other established styling documents do not include guidelines about
```

to be "PEMDAS operators", and we will also include the unary `+`, `-`, and `~` in
this category for convenience. The order of operations of PEMDAS operators is typically
taught in primary school and reinforced throughout a programmer's training and
experience, so it is assumed that most programmers are comfortable relying on the
implicit order of operations of expressions involving a few PEMDAS operations. Implicit
order of operations becomes less obvious as the number of distinct operator priority
levels increases and when multiple non-PEMDAS operators are involved. Portions of this
acronym, namely MD and AS, will be used below to refer to the corresponding operators.

## Implementation

The following rules are not imagined to be all encompassing, and there may be
syntactically valid cases in which the following rules would lead to contradictions.
Nonetheless, we expect them to be useful in most cases, and projects that adopt the
SPEC endeavor to use them where practical. These rules are intended to respect and
complement the [PEP 8 standards](https://peps.python.org/pep-0008), such as using
[implied line continuation](https://peps.python.org/pep-0008/#maximum-line-length) and

> and [breaking lines before binary operators](https://peps.python.org/pep-0008/#should-a-line-break-before-or-after-a-binary-operator).

Author: ```suggestion
and [breaking lines before binary operators](https://peps.python.org/pep-0008/#should-a-line-break-before-or-after-a-binary-operator).
Although examples do not show the use of hanging indent, any of the indentation styles
allowed by [PEP 8 Indentation](https://peps.python.org/pep-0008/#indentation) are
permitted by this SPEC.
```

0. Unless otherwise specified, rely on the implicit order of operations;
   i.e., do not add extraneous parentheses. For example, prefer `u**v + y**z`
   over `(u**v) + (y**z)`, and prefer `x + y + z` over `(x + y) + z`. A full
   list of implicit operator priority levels is given by
   [Operator Precedence](https://docs.python.org/3/reference/expressions.html#operator-precedence)
1. Always use the `**` operator and unary `+`, `-`, and `~` operators *without*
   surrounding whitespace. For example, prefer `-x**4` over `- (x ** 4)`. 
2. Always surround non-PEMDAS operators with whitespace, and always make the priority of
   non-PEMDAS operators explicit. For example, prefer `(x == y) or (w == t)` over
   `x==y or w==t`.[^1]
3. Always surround AS operators with whitespace.
4. Typically, surround MD operators with whitespace, except in the following situations.
   - When there are lower-priority operators (namely AS) within the same compound
     expression. For example, prefer `z = -x * y**t` over `z = -x*y**t`, but

>      prefer `z = w + x*y**t` over `z = w + x * y**t` due to the presence of the

Reviewer 2: As below, I think there should be parentheses here to distinguish between `*` and `**`:

`z = w + x*(y**t)`

Reviewer 2: Also, how would the rules format `w * x * y**z + u ** v * q`?

I think my preference is:

`(w * x * y**z) + (u**v * q)`

But I would accept:

`(w*x*(y**z)) + ((u**v)*q)`

Author: Here, the presence of the lower priority operator `+` in the expression means that there will be no space around the multiplication operators. Also, `**` is supposed to appear at the end of "implicit subexpression without spaces". So it would be `w*x*y**z + q*u**v`.

This is intended to be reminiscent of mathematics in which we would write
$wxy^z + qu^v$.

All operators with priority lower than PEMDAS operators need parentheses. But I didn't require parentheses in expressions that involve, say, multiplication and addition because I think people are familiar with the order of operations of such operators from elementary school and it is natural to them to omit the parentheses . I posit that it is just as natural to write `w*x + y*z` instead of `(w*x) + (y*z)` as it is to write `w**x * y**z` instead of `(w**x) * (y**z)`. Similarly, I think putting `**` at the end of subexpressions without spaces is enough to distinguish it visually from `*`.

The rules would be a bit simpler to express, actually, if we *did* require those parentheses like you want. But I'm not sure if that's very common in real code. I had ChatGPT write me a script to extract long math operations from the codebase.. maybe I'll resurrect that to see.

Reviewer 2: What about `w*x*(y**z) + q*(u**v)`? I would be happy with that.

Author: We need a stronger rationale than what makes one of us happy to change that : ) 

Would you really write $qu^v$ as $q(u^v)$?

And you'll say no, but the superscript stands out so it's readable. Then I say ok, well I think the `**` at the end stands out so it's readable.

Is what you're suggesting much more common in code already? That would be a good reason to change.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure what's more common, but indeed the problem for me is that it doesn't stand out. Especially for longer expressions such as

`a + b*c*d*e**f`

so we just disagree on

> I think putting ** at the end of subexpressions without spaces is enough to distinguish it visually from *.

But yeah, I'm happy to be outvoted on this one. Just for the record!

Author: And yeah, I think that's what we need is more opinions. Maybe we could add a limit on the number of chained operators in subexpressions without spaces, because I agree that `b*c*d*e**f` is not great style. But then maybe that's one of those cases where the last rule says - here, we can break a rule that has stopped making sense in this extreme situation.

     lower-priority addition operator.
   - The division operation would be written mathematically as a fraction with a
     horizontal bar. For example, prefer `z = t/v * x/y` over `z = t / v * x / y`
     if this would  be written mathematically as the product of two fractions,
     e.g. $\frac{t}{v} \cdot \frac{x}{y}.

> 5. Considering the previous rules, only `**`, `*`, `/`, and the unary `+`, `-`, and `~`

Reviewer: > Considering the previous rules

Linked to my comment saying that we should say if rules are to be applied in a specific order or not.

Reviewer: I also don't get the "only". To me it looks like all operators are listed.

Author: Note the distinction between unary and binary `+/-` and the existence of [many other operators](https://docs.python.org/3/reference/expressions.html#operator-precedence).

   operators can appear in implicit subexpressions without spaces. In such expressions,
   - Use at most one unary operator, and if used, ensure that it is the leftmost operator.

>    - Use at most `**` operator, and if used, ensure that it is the rightmost operator.

Reviewer: I am missing something or there is a missing word there. Space?

Author: ```suggestion
   - Use at most one unary operator, and if used, ensure that it is the leftmost operator.
   - Use at most one `**` operator, and if used, ensure that it is the rightmost operator.
```

   To achieve these goals, simplification or the addition of parentheses may be required.
   For example:
   - The expressions `--x` and `-~x` would be implicit subexpressions without spaces
     containing more than one unary operator. The former can be simplified to `+x` or

>      simply `x`, and the latter requires explicit parentheses, i.e. `-(~x)`.

Reviewer: We can leave this for now and see what formatting folks tell us about the feasibility of such thing. Like if we go down that route, why not also recommend some operations vs other for precision issue? All that could seem a bit too far for a formatter though.

Author: Sounds good. Note that these are all just examples of the implications of the two simple rules above that I thought were worth pointing out specifically.

   - The expression `x**y**z` would be an implicit subexpression without spaces
     containing more than one `**` operator. This code would be executed as `x**(y**z)`
     following the implicit order, but the explicit parentheses should be included for
     clarity.
   - In the expression `t**v*x**y + z`, no spaces are used around the multiplication
     operator due to the presence of the lower-priority addition operator. However,
     this would lead to `t**v*x**y` being an implicit subexpression without spaces
     containing more than one `**` operator. This code would be executed as 

>     `(t**v)*(x**y) + z`, but the explicit parentheses should be included for clarity.

Reviewer 2: 👍

   - In the expression `z + x**y/w`, no spaces are used around the division operator
     due to the presence of the lower-priority addition operator. However, this would
     lead to `x**y/w` being an implicit subexpression without spaces containing `**`
     to the left of another operator. Options for refactoring include the addition of
     parentheses (e.g. `z + (x**y)/w`) or pre-multiplying the exponential by a
     fraction (i.e. `x + 1/w*x**y`).
6. Simplify combinations of unary and binary `+` and `-` operators when possible.
   For example,
   - prefer `x + y` over `x + +y`,
   - prefer `x + y` over `x - -y`,
   - prefer `x - y` over `x - +y`, and
   - prefer `x - y` over `x + -y`.
7. If required to satisfy other style requirements, include line breaks before
   the outermost explicit subexpression possible. For example, if
   `t + (w + (x + (y + z))))` must be broken, prefer
   ```python3
   (t 

>     + (w + (x + (y + z)))))

Reviewer: We could clarify that we don't specify how parenthesis should be handled and it's only about where to break on mathematical operations.

Author: See https://github.com/tupui/specs/pull/1#discussion_r1678335827

   ```
   over
   ```python3
   (t + (w + (x + (y 
                   + z)))))
   ```
   If there are multiple candidates, include the break at the first opportunity.
8. If line breaks must occur within a compound subexpression, the break should
   be placed before the operator with lowest priority. For example, if
   (x + y*z) must be broken, prefer
   ```python3
   (x
    + y*z)
   ```
   over
   ```python3
   (x + y
    * z)
   ```
   If there are multiple candidates, include the break at the first opportunity.

> 9. The packages or subpackages from which mathematical functions and constants are used

Reviewer: This one is out of scope to me. Also linter/formatters have different rules for imports and typically would not allow to `import *` and would complain about shadowing, etc.

In general this is covered by the famous `Namespaces are one honking great idea -- let's do more of those!`. And long live `import scipy as sp` (which is getting loads of upvote on SO 😜 )

Author: It was a last minute addition. I thought it might be worth broadening the scope a bit in an effort to make mathematical code more clear. Can we see what others think?

Note that it doesn't specifically disallow `from _ import *` or specify how namespaces should be used in general. It only requires that the namespace be unambiguous (if there are mathematical functions from multiple packages used in the same file) and show one way of achieving that as an example.

Reviewer 2: I agree that this guidance is useful, however it does seem to be a bit of a digression from the main topic of the SPEC. Could it become a separate proposal, or something like an appendix?
